Testnet related tweaks (#8)
topos-protocol/dev-portal: content/module-2/5-testnet.md

---
title: Topos Testnet
description: The Topos testnet, overview and how-to
---

# Topos Testnet

> The Topos testnet is comprised of two subnets, Incal and Topos Subnet, along with a sequencer and an instance of the Executor Service. It provides all the infrastructure needed to deploy Smart Contracts to Incal and interact across subnets. The architecture of the testnet is identical to what you saw in the [Topos Playground Overview](./1-ERC20-Messaging.html).

Reviewer: Perhaps we should mention that more subnets are coming with something like:

```suggestion
The Topos testnet currently features two subnets, Incal and Topos Subnet, along with a sequencer and an instance of the Executor Service (as we progress through subsequent phases of the testnet, more subnets will be permissionlessly added). It provides all the infrastructure needed to deploy Smart Contracts to Incal and interact across subnets. The architecture of the testnet is identical to what you saw in the [Topos Playground Overview](./1-ERC20-Messaging.html).
```

As mentioned [previously](./2-explorer.md), the Topos testnet explorer is available at [https://explorer.testnet-1.topos.technology](https://explorer.testnet-1.topos.technology).

The Topos protocol is undergoing heavy development and features will be rolled out incrementally over time until mainnet is launched in 2024. The phases outlined below will change as detailed planning progresses.

## Phase 1: Core Infrastructure

> This is where we are today. Phase 1 provides the basic building blocks and connects them all together, providing the foundation for further work and refinement. Not all components are fully functional (e.g. no ZK proofs, deterministic broadcasts rather than trhe more performant probabilistic flavour described in the whitepaper), but all of the main interfaces are there and operational, ready for developers and early adopters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is where we are today. Phase 1 provides the basic building blocks and connects them all together, providing the foundation for further work and refinement. Not all components are fully functional (e.g. no ZK proofs, deterministic broadcasts rather than the more performant probabilistic flavour described in the whitepaper), but all of the main interfaces are there and operational, ready for developers and early adopters.
```

Included in Phase 1:

- Networking and block production/propagation
- Node synchronization and transactions processing
- Smart Contract deployment and interaction

## Phase 2: Community

Phase 2 is where we onboard the community and enable a wider involvment of partners and users across web3 and enterprise. During Phase 2, we will integrate with existing third-party testnets, provide access to the Topos ZK stack to developers, provide a more extensive and polished suite of tools.

## Phase 3: Ecosystem

> Phase 3 solidifies the community involvment into an actual ecosystem of projects, including the complete staking system (delegation, rewards, token issuance mechanics etc) and on-chain governance, allowing for permissionless subnet registration and collective decision making. In this phase we expect do deliver the full suite of required tooling (explorer, exchange integrationtools, "stdlib" for Smart Contract developers etc).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Phase 3 solidifies the community involvment into an actual ecosystem of projects, including the complete staking system (delegation, rewards, token issuance mechanics, etc.) and on-chain governance, allowing for permissionless subnet registration and collective decision making. In this phase we expect do deliver the full suite of required tooling (explorer, exchange integration tools, "stdlib" for Smart Contract developers, etc.).
```

## Phase 4: Advanced features
Phase 4 is where it all comes together and the full power of ZK cryptography is made available.

Included in Phase 4:

- Certificates are threshold signed, pubkey as registration key/ID, and key resharing enabled (ICE-FROST)
- Oracle integration
- On-chain protocol upgrades
- zkEVM integration

## Phase 5: Security and stress test
Phase 5 is the last phase before mainnet and dedicated to tying up loose ends, perform audits, performance and stress tests.

Included in Phase 5:

> - Penetration Testing

Reviewer: Actually "pen test" here is basically like the bounty programs, so we can probably remove pen test?

Author: Not really? The a bug bounty program is there to incentivize people to read code and find holes without any involvement from us. Penetration testing is an active attack on some existing infrastructure. It would be very rude (and illegal in most places) to execute such a test without telling us about it first. 
Scope of bug bounties might be:
- networking bugs
- malformed data causing crashes
- reentrancy bugs, process privilege escalation due to unsafe code 
- cryptography issues

A pen test would be us paying someone to attack one of our validators and get root on the machine or steal our private keys. The testers are allowed to use any bugs (like the kinds listed above), social hacking, malware or DoS attacks. Our teams would not know that the attacker is a white hacker.
